# Lie Group and Lie Algebra

## Groups

For a set that has only one "well-defined" operation, we call it a group. Formally, a group is a set of elements together with an operation that combines any two of its elements to form a third element also in the set, while satisfying four conditions called the **group axioms**, namely closure, associativity, identity, and invertibility.

Let $A$ be a set and $\cdot$ be the set operation. Then $G = (A, \cdot)$, is a group if it satisfies the following conditions:

1. **Closure:** $\forall a_1, a_2 \in A, a_1 \cdot a_2 \in A$.
2. **Associativity:** $\forall a_1, a_2, a_3 \in A, a_1 \cdot (a_2 \cdot a_3) = (a_1 \cdot a_2) \cdot a_3 = a_1 \cdot a_2 \cdot a_3$.
3. **Identity:** $\exists a_0 \in A, \ \text{s.t.} \ \forall a \in A, a_0 \cdot a = a \cdot a_0 = a$.
4. **Invertibility:** $\forall a \in A, \exists a^{-1} \in A, \ \text{s.t.} \ a \cdot a^{-1} = a_0$. 

Few examples:

1. $G = (\mathbb{Z}, +)$
2. $G = (SO(3), \cdot)$, where $\cdot$ is the matrix multiplication.

## Lie Groups

Lie groups refer to a group with continuous (smooth) and differentiable manifold properties. The Lie groups in these notes are all real matrix groups; group elements are represented as matrices in $\mathbb{R}^{n \times n}$. As shown in the example above, the groups' multiplication and inversion operations are identically matrix multiplication and inversion, i.e., $G = (SO(n), \cdot)$. Since each group is represented by a specific subclass of non-singular $n \times n$ matrices, there are fewer than $n^2$ degrees of freedom.

## Lie Algebra

Given a Lie group $G \in \mathbb{R}^{n \times n}$ with $k$ degrees of freedom, its Lie algebra $\mathfrak{g}$ is the space of differential transformations - the **tangent space** - around the identitiy element of group $G$. The Lie algebra is a vector space generated by differentiating the group trasnformations along chosen directions in the space, at the identity transformation. In order words, Lie algebra describes the local structure of the Lie group around its identity element. This tangent space is a $k$-dimensional vector space with basis elements (**generators**) $\left\{G_1, \ldots, G_k \right\}$. Elements of the Lie Algebra are represented as matrices in $\mathbb{R}^{n \times n}$, but under addition and scalar multiplication and not matrix multiplication.

The tangent space associated with a Lie group provides an "optimal" space in which to represent differential quantities related to the group. Velocities, Jacobians, and covariances of transformations are well-represented in the tanget space around a transformation. This is the optimal space in which to represent differential quanities because:

1. The tanget space is a vector space with the same dimension as the number of degrees of freedom of the group transformations

2. The exponential map convers any element of the tanget space exactly into a transformation in the group

3. The adjoint linearly and exactly transforms tangent vectors from one tanget space to another.

With every matrix Lie group is associated a Lie algebra, which consists of a vector space $\mathbb{V}$ over some field $\mathbb{F}$, and a binary operation $\left[, \right]$, called the Lie bracket. The following properties are satisfied for Lie Algebra $(\mathbb{V}, \mathbb{F}, \left[, \right])$:

1. **Closure:** $\forall \mathbf{X}, \mathbf{Y} \in \mathbb{V}; \ \left[ \mathbf{X}, \mathbf{Y} \right] \in \mathbb{V}$.
2. **Bilinear composition:** $\forall \mathbf{X}, \mathbf{Y}, \mathbf{Z} \in \mathbb{V}; \ a,b \in \mathbb{F}$, we have:

    $$
    \begin{align}
    &\left[a \mathbf{X} + b \mathbf{Y}, \mathbf{Z} \right] = a \left[\mathbf{X}, \mathbf{Z} \right] + b \left[ \mathbf{Y}, \mathbf{Z} \right] \\
    &\left[\mathbf{Z}, a \mathbf{X} + b \mathbf{Y} \right] = a \left[ \mathbf{Z}, \mathbf{X} \right] + b \left[ \mathbf{Z}, \mathbf{Y} \right].
    \end{align}
    $$

3. **Reflexive:** $\forall \mathbf{X} \in \mathbb{V}; \ \left[ \mathbf{X}, \mathbf{X} \right] = 0$.
4. **Jacobi identity:** $\forall \mathbf{X}, \mathbf{Y}, \mathbf{Z} \in \mathbb{V}; \ \left[ \mathbf{X}, \left[ \mathbf{Y}, \mathbf{Z} \right] \right] + \left[ \mathbf{Z}, \left[ \mathbf{X}, \mathbf{Y} \right] \right] + \left[ \mathbf{Y}, \left[ \mathbf{Z}, \mathbf{X} \right] \right] = 0$.

An example is cross product defined on the 3D vector $\mathbb{R}^3$ is a lie bracket.

## Exponential Map and Logarithm Map

The expononential map takes elements in the Lie algebra to elements in the Lie group. Intuitively, it walks along the group manifold in the differential direction specified by the tanget vector in the Lie algebra. The matrix expnential is given by:

$$
\exp \left( \mathbf{A} \right) = \mathbf{I} + \mathbf{A} + \frac{1}{2!} \mathbf{A}^2 + \frac{1}{3!} \mathbf{A}^3 + \ldots = \sum^{\infty}_{n = 0} \frac{1}{n!} \mathbf{A}^n,
$$

where $\mathbf{A} \in \mathbb{R}^{M \times M}$ is a square matrix.

The inverse conversion is the logarithm map:

$$
\ln \left( \mathbf{A} \right) = \sum^{\infty}_{n = 1} \frac{(-1)^{n - 1}}{n} (\mathbf{A} - \mathbf{I})^n.
$$

## Adjoints

The adjoint of a Lie group is a way of describing the elements of that group as linear transformations of its Lie algebra, which is a vector space. We have a Lie group $G$ with some abstract elements living in some wiggly curved space since $G$ is a manifold. We'd like to move everything into some more pleasent space i.e., vector space. To do this transformation, we want to represent elements of $G$ as matrices that act on a vector space, i.e., its Lie algebra. This representation is called the adjoint representation.

Consider tangent vectors $\mathbf{a}, \mathbf{b} \in \mathfrak{g}$ and a group element $\mathbf{X} \in G$. We are interested in finding a commuititive property for $\mathbf{b}$ such that:

$$
\begin{align}
&\exp{(\mathbf{b})} \mathbf{X} = \mathbf{X} \exp{(\mathbf{a})} \\
\Longrightarrow \quad& \exp{(\mathbf{b})} = \mathbf{X} \exp{(\mathbf{a})} \mathbf{X}^{-1}.
\end{align}
$$

Then we have:

$$
\mathbf{b} = \log \left( \mathbf{X} \exp{(\mathbf{a})} \mathbf{Z}^{-1} \right).
$$

A group $G \in \mathbb{R}^{n \times n}$ with $k$ degrees of freedom has an isomorphic representation as the group of linear transformations on $\mathfrak{g}$ called the adjoint:

$$
\begin{align}
\text{Adj}_{\mathbf{X}}: \ \mathfrak{g} \ &\rightarrow \ \mathfrak{g} \\
\text{Adj}_{\mathbf{X}} \left( \mathbf{a} \right) &= \mathbf{X} \mathbf{a} \mathbf{X}^{-1} \in \mathfrak{g}. \\
\end{align}
$$

$\mathbf{b}$ can be defined using the adjoint in the previous equation:

$$
\begin{align}
\mathbf{b} &\equiv \text{Adj}_{\mathbf{X}} (\mathbf{a}) \\ 
\Longrightarrow \exp{(\mathbf{b})} &= \mathbf{X} \exp{(\mathbf{a})} \mathbf{X}^{-1} \\
\Longrightarrow \exp{(\mathbf{b})} \mathbf{X} &= \mathbf{X} \exp{(\mathbf{a})}.
\end{align}
$$






